Let's dive into background synchronization then, how does it work?
Well background synchronization is all about sending data to a server when we have no internet connection.
So here's the setup,
we have our web application running in the browser,
of course it's also served by a server, can be the same as our back-end server but doesn't have to
and we got our back-end server, again that maybe the server which is serving our HTML pages but it
may just be an API we built, that does not matter at all.
Now the goal is to send some data to the server.
Now of course this will work most of the time
but of course there's a chance that the user does this right at the point of time we have no internet
connection which is an issue obviously because it will fail.
Now just as we're able to render some of our pages offline with service workers, wouldn't it be great
if we could also send data when we're not online?
So kind of store the request and send it at a later point of time.
Remember that on service workers, I told you that you can't cache post requests,
you can cache the response but you can't cache
the request itself to be sent at a later point of time.
Now there is a technique we can use though, we can use a service worker to register a sync task,
so basically tell the service worker hey here is something I want to do eventually, I want to send data,
please be aware of that and register it as a task, as a synchronization task.
Now of course, registering the task alone isn't everything we have to do,
we also need to store the data we want to send with the request, with the post or put request or whatever
it is and as this is probably JSON data, even if it were an image it would be possible though, we can
store it in an indexedDB
and actually you will see this later in the course once we add images, that you can store images in indexedDB
too,
so it's not just limited to JSON data.
So basically the data we want to attach to the post request or to the put request or whatever it is,
we store it here.
Now with that, we got everything prepared to send it at a later point of time,
eventually connectivity will reestablish.
Now if we always had internet connectivity, the service worker will go ahead and execute that task
immediately, so we can take this route even if we know we have internet connection,
it will then just execute it immediately as I just said.
However if we didn't have connectivity and it is re-established, it will also work now. In both situations,
so us having connectivity or us getting connectivity again, a so-called sync event will be executed on
the service worker and you can listen to that event in the service worker.
Once this event occurs, the service worker will, if we instruct it to do so,
fetcher the request data and send the data to the server, so it will then make the request.
The cool thing is and please note that, that this will even work if we did close the tab or on mobile
phones even the browser.
So our website doesn't have to be open for this to work,
we can just go away,
that is why it's also a good idea to register a sync task even if we do have internet connection
because it'll then still execute even if the user immediately closes the browser after hitting a button
or something like that.
This is how it works behind the scenes,
now let's see how we can implement it in our application.